Astronauts Butch Wilmore and Suni Williams, crew members of NASA’s Boeing Crew Flight Test mission, performed a host of research activities and 
other roles aboard the International Space Station. Wilmore and Williams give the microgravity laboratory a complement of nine people working through daily 
tasks. On Monday, Wilmore and Williams reviewed the procedures for using the Fluid Systems Servicer, which drains, purges, and circulates fluids on systems 
aboard the space station. Wilmore then refilled coolant loops in the water pump assembly located in the Columbus module. Tuesday saw the pair take turns 
during the morning pedaling on an exercise cycle while attached to heart and breathing sensors that measured their aerobic capacity. The duo then split 
up as Wilmore serviced a pair of research freezers that preserve scientific samples and Williams installed hardware on an experiment that explores 
atmospheric reentry and thermal protection systems.

The seven-member Expedition 71 crew joined the two Boeing Crew Flight Test astronauts to practice an emergency drill in collaboration with mission 
controllers. The teams aboard the orbital outpost and on the ground coordinated communications and reviewed procedures in the unlikely event of a pressure 
leak, chemical leak, or fire aboard the space station. Following that, Wilmore and Williams spoke to reporters from the space station, answering questions 
about their mission and the Starliner vehicle. NASA and Boeing managers also discussed the Crew Flight Test mission with the media in an audio 
teleconference afterward. Watch the crew news conference here and listen to the media briefing here. The duo also completed life support work refilling 
temperature loops with water in the Tranquility module’s internal thermal control system.

Advanced biology research also was underway aboard the orbiting lab on Thursday with astronauts exploring how living in space affects the human body and 
mind. Williams extracted DNA to identify microbe samples collected from station water systems. Results from the genetic biotechnology experiment may 
improve ways to keep crews healthy and spacecraft systems clean on future missions.NASA astronaut Michael Barratt also assisted Wilmore, who spent all day servicing a pair of spacesuits in the Quest airlock. The duo cleaned the suits’ 
cooling loops and checked the communication systems ahead of a spacewalk planned for July 29.

NASA and Boeing continue working to increase their understanding of the Starliner spacecraft’s propulsion system before the return of agency astronauts 
Butch Wilmore and Suni Williams to Earth from the International Space Station. Teams are conducting ground tests at the agency’s White Sands Test Facility 
in New Mexico using a new Reaction Control System thruster previously planned for use on a future Starliner flight.Wilmore and Williams provided an update 
Wednesday about their flight on Starliner and work aboard the space station during an Earth to space call. Following the crew news conference, NASA’s 
Commercial Crew Program Manager Steve Stich and Boeing Commercial Crew Program Manager and Vice President Mark Nappi spoke extensively about the mission 
and testing plans ahead of the Crew Flight Test return. Listen to a replay of the leadership briefing. After an agency-level readiness review later this 
month, NASA and Boeing plan to select a new target return date for the Crew Flight Test. Following this review, NASA plans to host a televised briefing and 
will share more details on that when finalized.

NASA astronauts Butch Wilmore, commander, and Suni Williams, pilot, of NASA’s Boeing Crew Flight Test, continue contributing to International Space Station 
research and activities since their arrival on June 6 to the orbiting laboratory. Wilmore and Williams have completed half of all hands-on research time 
conducted aboard the station as the expedition crew prepares for the departure of Northrop Grumman’s Cygnus. As packing takes most of the crew’s time, the
extra help from Wilmore and Williams allows packing and research to happen simultaneously. To learn more about what other crew members are doing aboard the 
International Space Station, visit: blogs.nasa.gov/spacestation.

Media are invited to hear Wilmore and Williams discuss their mission during an Earth-to-space call at 11 a.m. EDT Wednesday, July 10. Read the agency’s 
coverage advisory for more information. On July 1, Wilmore and Williams spent the morning in the Permanent Multipurpose Module, organizing stowage and 
tidying up. Wilmore then moved into the Japanese Experiment Module to disassemble an empty NanoRacks CubeSat Deployer in preparation for upcoming 
NanoRacks missions. Later, Wilmore prepped and viewed samples for the Moon Microscope, a demonstration that allows flight surgeons on Earth to diagnose 
illnesses and could provide diagnostic capabilities for crews on future missions to the Moon and Mars. Meanwhile, Williams conducted some routine orbital 
pluming, then audited U.S. stowage items housed inside the Zarya module.

On July 2, Wilmore joined NASA astronaut Tracy Dyson to load trash and discarded gear inside Northrop Grumman’s Cygnus spacecraft. Cygnus is scheduled to 
be released from the Unity module later this month for disposal over the South Pacific Ocean, ending its five-and-a-half-month stay at the orbiting lab. 
Williams spent most of Tuesday on Starliner operations and then assessed the air flow of the pump filter attached to the Advanced Plant Habitat. At the end 
of the day, Williams and all eight of her crewmates held a conference with ground teams. Also, on July 2, teams brought the Starliner spacecraft out of 
quiescent mode to conduct mission data loads, or MDLs. These are files for the spacecraft’s computer to understand current inertial and relative navigation 
states, Earth rotation, thermal conditioning, and more. The spacecraft was commanded back to a docked quiescent mode after MDL loading was complete.
